---
title : Goals and expectations
---

The goal of this course is to introduce methods and theoretical
principles for data analysis.  In addition, you will learn some
computing skills that will allow you to analyze data.

To do well in this course, you should master all of the conceptual
material covered in the course
[ebook](https://www.stat.lsa.umich.edu/~kshedden/introds).  You will
also need to study the Jupyter notebooks illustrating various
techniques of data management and analysis.  Lectures and lab
discussions will also cover important topics that you are expected to
master.

## Mathematics

Statistics and data science have important origins in the field of
mathematics.  In that field, precise definitions and appropriate use
of terminology are very important.  A data scientist must be able to
communicate effectively about their findings, and using terminology
appropriately is an important aspect of being a proficient
communicator.  Therefore, you will be expected to master all of the
terminology introduced in this course -- you should be able to use the
terms that we cover precisely, and explain them correctly in your own
words.

This course relies on high-school mathematics.  We will not use any
calculus, but you should be comfortable with algebra, pre-calculus
(e.g. functions), and mathematical tools such as logarithms.  You may
be asked to do some very basic calculations by hand to show that you
understand a concept, but for the most part we will be using computers
to do all of our calculations.  It is much more important that you
understand the relevant mathematical concepts, rather than being good
at arithmetic and other calculations.

## Application domains

Data science techniques are used in a "domain" from which the
motivating question arises.  This could be a scientific domain, such
as chemistry or psychology, or a domain from the setting of business,
industry, commerce, or government.  It is rarely possible to
completely separate the data science from the context in which the
data and motivating questions arise.  Therefore, successful data
scientists must have broad intellectual curiosity, and be unafraid to
learn some basic background information about a variety of different
fields.  Do not be surprised if the discussions in this course involve
basic concepts from physics, economics, medicine, sociology, or other
areas.  We will not expect you to know much about these subjects, but
you must be willing to engage in critical thinking about the subjects
for which our datasets are relevant.

## Computing

This course will involve a fair amount of computer programming.  You
are not expected to have previous experience with any programming
language.  However you should be willing to engage seriously with this
aspect of the course.  Although Python is sometimes said to be an easy
programming language to learn, any programming language has a steep
learning curve at the beginning.  The purpose of programming in this
course is to allow you to analyze data.  At the beginning of the
course, you will mainly be taking code that is provided to you and
making small modifications to it.  But by the end of the course, you
should be able to do moderately sophisticated data analyses on your
own.

The exams in this course will focus primarily on statistical
principles.  You will need to understand the purpose and basic
theoretical properties of the statistical tools that we cover.  You
will also need to demonstrate that you understand how to formulate
questions in statistical terms, how to interpret the results that
different statistical procedures produce, and how to communicate these
results effectively.  Coding is a means to an end for us, rather than
an end in itself, but being able to write clear and organized code is
very important because it enables other people to read your code and
verify what it does.  In an exam setting, you will not be asked to
write code unaided, but you will be asked to read fragments of code
that are provided to you, explain what it does, and identify any
problems in the code.
